

1.2 What is functional programming?
-----------------------------------
1a) Functional programming is a computer programming paradigm that relies on functions modeled on mathematical functions.
1b) The essence of functional programming is that programs are a combination of expressions.
1c) Expressions include concrete values, variables, and also functions.
1d) Functions have a more specific definition: they are expressions that are applied to an argument or input and, once applied, can be reduced or evaluated.
1e) In Haskell, and in functional programming more generally, functions are first-class: they can be used as values or passed as arguments, or inputs, to yet more functions.
1f) We'll define these terms more carefully as we progress through the chapter.

2a) Functional programming languages are all based on the lambda calculus.
2b) Some languages in this general category incorporate features that aren't translatable into lambda expressions.
2c) Haskell is a pure functional language, because it does not.
2c) We'll further address this notion of purity later in the book, but it isn't a judgment of the moral worth of other languages.

3a) The word purity in functional programming is sometimes also used to mean what is more properly called referential transparency.
3b) Referential transparency means that the same function, given the same values to evaluate, will always return the same result in pure functional programming, as they do in math.

4a) Haskell's pure functional basis also lends it a high degree of abstraction and composability.
4b) Abstraction allows you to write shorter, more concise programs by factoring common, repeated structures into more generic code that can be reused.
4c) Haskell programs are built from separate, independent functions, kind of like LEGO®: the functions are bricks that can be assembled and reassembled.

5a) These features also make Haskell's syntax rather minimalist, as you'll soon see.
