22.11.1 A warm-up stretch
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
These exercises are designed to be a warm-up
and to get you using some of the stuff we've
learned in the last few chapters. While these
exercises comprise code fragments from real
code, they are simplified in order to be
discrete exercises. That will allow us to
highlight and practice some of the type
manipulation from ``Traversable`` and
``Reader``, both of which are tricky.

The first simplified part is that we're going
to set up some toy data. In the real programs
these are taken from, the data is coming from
somewhere else -- a database, for example. We
just need some lists of numbers. We're going
to use some functions from ``Control.Applicative``
and ``Data.Maybe``, so we'll import those at
the top of our practice file. We'll call our
lists of toy data by common variable names,
for simplicity::

  module ReaderPractice where
  import Control.Applicative
  import Data.Maybe

  x = [1, 2, 3]
  y = [4, 5, 6]
  z = [7, 8, 9]

The next thing we want to do is write some
functions that zip those lists together and
use lookup to find the value associated with
a specified key in our zipped lists. For
demonstration purposes, it's nice to have
predictable outputs, so we recommend writing
some that are concrete values, as well as one
that can be applied to a variable::

  lookup :: Eq a => a -> [(a, b)] -> Maybe b
  -- zip x and y using 3 as the lookup key
  xs :: Maybe Integer
  xs = undefined

  -- zip y and z using 6 as the lookup key
  ys :: Maybe Integer
  ys = undefined

It's also nice to have one that will return
Nothing, like this one::

  -- zip x and y using 4 as the lookup key
  zs :: Maybe Integer
  zs = lookup 4 $ zip x y

  -- now zip x and z using a
  -- variable lookup key
  z' :: Integer -> Maybe Integer
  z' n = undefined

Now, we want to add the ability to make a
``Maybe (,)`` of values using ``Applicative``.
Have ``x1`` make a tuple of ``xs`` and ``ys``
and ``x2`` make a tuple of of ``ys`` and
``zs``. Also, write ``x3``, which takes one
input and makes a tuple of the results of two
applications of ``z'`` from above::

  x1 :: Maybe (Integer, Integer)
  x1 = undefined

  x2 :: Maybe (Integer, Integer)
  x2 = undefined

  x3 :: Integer -> (Maybe Integer, Maybe Integer)
  x3 = undefined

Your outputs from those should look like
this::

  *ReaderPractice> x1
  Just (6,9)

  *ReaderPractice> x2
  Nothing

  *ReaderPractice> x3 3
  (Just 9,Just 9)

Next, we're going to make some helper
functions. Let's use ``uncurry`` to allow us
to add the two values that are inside a
tuple::

  uncurry :: (a -> b -> c) -> (a, b) -> c

The first argument is a function. In this
case, we want it to be addition. ``summed`` is
``uncurry`` with addition as the first
argument::

  summed :: Num c => (c, c) -> c
  summed = undefined

And now, we'll make a function similar to some
we've seen before that lifts a Boolean
function over two partially applied functions::

  bolt :: Integer -> Bool
  -- use &&, >3, <8
  bolt = undefined

Finally, we use ``fromMaybe`` in the main
exercise, so let's look at that::

  fromMaybe :: a -> Maybe a -> a

You give it a default value and a ``Maybe``
value.  If the ``Maybe`` value is a ``Just
a``, it will return the ``a`` value. If the
value is ``Nothing``, it returns the default
value instead::

  *ReaderPractice> fromMaybe 0 xs
  6

  *ReaderPractice> fromMaybe 0 zs
  0

Now, we'll cobble together a main, so that in
one call, we can execute several things at
once::

  main :: IO ()
  main = do
    print $ sequenceA [Just 3, Just 2, Just 1]
    print $ sequenceA [x, y]
    print $ sequenceA [xs, ys]
    print $ summed <$> ((,) <$> xs <*> ys)
    print $ fmap summed ((,) <$> xs <*> zs)
    print $ bolt 7
    print $ fmap bolt z

When you run this in GHCi, your results should
look like this::

  *ReaderPractice> main
  Just [3,2,1]
  [[1,4],[1,5],[1,6],[2,4],[2,5],[2,6],[3,4],[3,5],[3,6]]
  Just [6,9]
  Just 15
  Nothing
  True
  [True,False,False]

Next, we're going to add one that combines
``sequenceA`` and ``Reader`` in a somewhat
surprising way (add this to main)::

  print $ sequenceA [(>3), (<8), even] 7

The type of ``sequenceA`` is ``sequenceA ::
(Applicative f, Traversable t) =>
t (f a) -> f (t a)``

So in this::

  sequenceA [(>3), (<8), even] 7

The ``f`` is specialized to ``(->) a`` and
``t`` is specialized to ``[]``.

We have a ``Reader`` for the ``Applicative``
(functions) and a traversable for the list.
Pretty handy. We're going to call this
function ``sequA`` for the purposes of the
following exercises::

  sequA :: Integral a => a -> [Bool]
  sequA m =
    sequenceA [(>3), (<8), even] m

And henceforth let::

  summed <$> ((,) <$> xs <*> ys)

Be known as ``s'``.

OK, your turn. Within the main above, write
the following (you can delete everything after
do now, if you prefer—just remember to use
print to be able to print the results of what
you're adding):

1. Fold the Boolean conjunction operator over
   the list of results of ``sequA`` (applied
   to some value).

2. Apply ``sequA`` to ``s'`` -- you'll need
   ``fromMaybe``.

3. Apply ``bolt`` to ``ys`` -- you'll need
   ``fromMaybe``.
